=head1 PTP - An expressive Pipelining Text Processor

=head2 DESCRIPTION

B<PTP> is a versatile and expressive text processor program. The core features
that it tries to provide are the following:

=over 8

=item * Provide B<grep>, B<sed>-like and other operations with a coherent
regular expressions language (B<grep> has a B<-P> flag but B<sed> has nothing of
the like).

=item * Provide a powerful input/output files support, that is lacking when
using vanilla-Perl one-liner (recursion in directories, output in-place with
optional backups, etc.).

=item * Pipelining of multiple operations on multiple files (using a pipeline
made of several standard tool usually makes it difficult to process several
input files at once).

=back

See examples of B<PTP> in action in the L<documentation|ptp/EXAMPLES>.

=head2 DOCUMENTATION

You can find the documentation for the program itself on L<meta::cpan|ptp>.
After the program is installed, you can also get its documentation by running
any of the following commands: B<man ptp>, B<ptp --help> or B<perldoc ptp>.

The built-in B<--help> rendering will be better if the B<perldoc> program is
installed. It usually comes in a B<perl-doc> package on most systems.

=head2 INSTALLATION

=head3 Requirements

To install this program you need Perl and its cpanminus package manager. The
B<perldoc> program is recommended but not required. You can these dependencies
with one of the following command lines, depending on your OS:

    # On Debian, Ubuntu, Mint, etc.
    sudo apt-get install perl cpanminus perl-doc build-essential

    # On Red Hat, Fedora, CentOS, etc.
    sudo yum install perl Perl-App-cpanminus perl-doc gcc make

=head3 Installing from CPAN (recommanded)

This program is available on CPAN (the Perl package manager). So, to install
B<ptp> automatically using CPAN, you can just run the following command:

    sudo cpanm App::PTP -n -L /usr/local --man-pages --install-args 'DESTINSTALLBIN=/usr/local/bin'

=head3 Installing from the Git sources

To install the program manually from Git, you can run the following commands:

    git clone https://github.com/mkende/ptp.git
    cd ptp
    cpanm --installdeps . -n --with-configure
    perl Makefile.PL
    make
    # Optionally:
    # make test
    sudo make install

Note that this approach is discouraged because you will need to reinstall B<ptp>
every time you update your system Perl.
